Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show so stay with us
this is the Science Fiction Radio Show a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy
and here are your hosts
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson collecting is a hobby or an obsession that
many people engage in. Coins, stamps, antiques, people collect almost anything and
science fiction fans are certainly no exception. There are a fair number of
science fiction collectors scattered around some are so called completists who
accumulate anything related to the field while others concentrate on a
particular thing. Many science fiction collectors for example collect books
either paperbacks or hardbacks or magazines having to do with science fiction or
fantasy. The Science Fiction Radio Show spoke with two serious collectors
recently each with a different background in a different area of interest. The
first is John Marks, a chemistry professor at Texas Tech University in Lubbock,
Texas. The second is Bob Wayne, the owner of fantastic worlds bookstore in Fort
Worth, Texas. We asked Bob Wayne what kind of science fiction material he collects.
At this time my main collections I'm collecting things by Philip Jose Farmer
Michael Moorcock and Harlan Ellison and so i just concentrate you know
essentially on finding things that i don't already have and i work off of
bibliographies and lists and try to find things are in in better condition than
the ones i already have so looking for for for hardcover books that are you know
where they're published in small quantities and looking for paperback books that
are published under pseudonyms or from small presses or the things that require
the most attention for finding them at inexpensive prices. John Marks goes about
it a little differently. i started out with paperbacks and uh the digest
magazines i've gone back in uh terms of get it picking up the old pulp magazines
to the point where now i have almost all of them that were ever published
starting back with Weird Tales in 1923 and Amazing Stories in 1926 i'm very
proud of my complete collection of weird tales since i understand there's only
about 30 copies or so in existence and uh just about as good on astounding
science fiction for example. Recently i have been branching out into hardbacks
also but i'm a long long ways from complete on that what about paperbacks well i
have about 14, 15 000 is that enough for you we asked john marks if he picks up
all paperbacks or just certain kinds there's always a problem in making the
where do you draw the line but i basically get everything that's clearly science
fiction um everything that's clearly fantasy i kind of draw the line someplace
in the horror vein to one side and maybe fairy tales on the other side and uh
sometimes i'll draw the line at uh you know uh an atom bomb story that's setting
them near future or something like that but basically i get every hard every
paperback in science fiction and fantasy. We asked Wayne what he would advise a
reader who wanted to turn collector well first thing i would do obviously a
person is going to come in and say i want to start collecting has already read
some stuff so i would say to them what have you read so far give me the name of
some authors that you've enjoyed some books that you've liked. I would
springboard off of that to pointing out things that i would feel there would be
you know good collectible books within their field of interest so that was how
you know i would handle that particular situation. We asked Marks the same
question and he had much the same answer. Probably what most people will do when
they start is they will pick a favorite author or authors and try to get all the
books by that person somebody with a limited budget just starting think you know
that's it's a pretty good first step to say for example get every book a copy of
some edition of every book that Robert A. Heinlein has written or Andre Norton
or or you name it whoever whoever the person happens to like and uh once they do
that and if they if they start getting the collecting bug then pretty soon
they'll want to trade in those later printings for first editions and uh then if
they've really gotten into it they'll want to trade in those first beat up first
editions for better first copies of the first editions when they do it they'll
probably start expanding into into other authors, More on collecting on our next
show.
this has been the Science Fiction Radio Show a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa Texas.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. We are talking with two collectors of
science fiction books, John Marks, a chemistry professor at Texas Tech
University, and Bob Wayne, owner of the Fantastic Worlds bookstore in Fort
Worth, Texas. We asked Bob Wayne what makes a book valuable, a collectible item.
Well, from the simplest standpoint, what makes a hardback book collectible to
anyone is simply supply and demand, and that there are more people wanting the
book than there are books available at cover price. Usually this doesn't take
place, obviously, until after the book is out of print. But oftentimes, science
fiction fans will see a hardcover book and they'll say, hmm, well, if I wait a
year, I can buy that in paperback. And they'll pass the book up. And then when
the book comes out in paperback, they read it and discover it's the greatest
thing since they put raisins in bread. So they go back and they want to buy it
in hardcover for a durable copy. However, at this time, the publisher has
probably already either remaindered the book or allowed the book to go out of
print when all the copies were sold by the people who did buy it in hardcover.
And the supply of people out there looking for the book and demanding, I want a
copy of book X, and no books being available, forces the price up on the
collector's market. The other things that can cause a book to become valuable
are usually errors in the same way that a stamp being printed upside down would
cause a stamp to be valuable. If a publisher decides to accidentally destroy all
the copies of a book so that only a few hundred exist, or if only a few copies
are made with some variation that was corrected in another edition, this also
can cause a book to be valuable. And then you also can have a situation where
you create a book just to make a book valuable. That would be the case whenever
you have a strictly limited edition where it's signed and numbered. What would a
real prize be for the collector of hardback science fiction books? John Marks
answers this one. Well, it depends on what you're talking about. For example,
here's an example a lot of people would know about. Frank Herbert's Dune,
hardcover the first edition, is worth a great, great deal of money simply
because Dune wasn't that well known when it first came out, didn't attract that
much attention until slowly over several years, and that first hardcover edition
is extremely hard to find. So that in good condition, I understand that a first
edition is worth a thousand bucks. Well, I don't have a copy of it. I wouldn't
mind having a copy at all, although I wouldn't pay that money for it. But I know
somebody who found one in the garage sale in Lubbock. That bugs the heck out of
me. It wasn't me. We asked Marks how much a valuable science fiction paperback
might be worth. Well, I could tell you the highest price I've heard anybody
charge for anything, and that was, and I don't know that they got it, this was
the asking price, was $175 for Cat in a Canary House by Kurt Vonnegut. And that
book, which is his only collection of short stories and which are all
unabashedly science fiction, he vows he'll never allow reprints as long as he
lives, and there aren't all that many copies available, so the price of that
thing has been really escalating. I got my copy for $3, I don't mind telling
you. With such prices for single books, collecting seems to be a good
investment. We asked John Marks if it was. My advice to somebody who wants to do
that is you've got to know a heck of a lot about this field before you're likely
to be very successful at it, going about it from that standpoint, because just
because something is old doesn't necessarily mean that it's especially valuable.
And what's real, it would be really difficult from the investor's standpoint,
from somebody who knew very little about the field, is to know which books to
pick up now because 10 years from now they're going to be worth a lot. In fact,
that's kind of hard for me to guess. And I certainly know more about it than a
lot of people do. We'll continue with the subject of collecting on our next
show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
and here are your hosts. This is Daryl Lane and David Carson.
John Marks a professor of chemistry at Texas Tech University in Lubbock, Texas. His
passion is collecting science fiction books and magazines, and he has many
thousands of them. We asked him if he had an area of concentration in his
collecting. Well, I once gave a talk on this subject, and I titled it The
Complete Science Fiction Collector, Confessions of a Pack Rat. In other words,
I'm very, very versatile and dabbling in my tastes. I don't like all kinds of
things equally, but I collect anything that's published in the science fiction
and fantasy vein, I get my hands on, and then I can afford. Which means almost,
I've got copies of almost every book that's been published. Why does John Marks
collect science fiction books? What's the fascination? Because it's there? Sure.
That's actually, I suppose, a difficult question for anyone to answer. First of
all, you have to love books, or whatever you're collecting. I mean, this is the
collector's mania. There's lots of people that collect anything from matchbooks
to old Avon bottles, for heaven's sakes. And I collect what I enjoy from other
standpoints. I enjoy the artwork on them. I enjoy reading the things. I like to
read at least a representative book by any author that's important in the field,
and so on. And I just love books. I love to handle them. I love to sort them,
catalog them, put them away, just look at them. And that's what I do with a fair
portion of my spare time, I guess. But why collect science fiction books? Why
not coins or stamps or seashells? Because I love science fiction. Something we
haven't gotten into the conversation yet is, here at Texas Tech, I also am
involved in helping the team teach the course in science fiction. We have a
special course through our honors program, and there are three or four of us
every semester team teach this thing to a small group, and we try to teach them
principles about writing also, so it's a creative writing course, very much a
discussion course, and so on. But I just love science fiction. I don't mind
reading an occasional mystery, let's say. I haven't read a Western in 20 years,
but I've read lots of science fiction. Since that's what I like to read, that's
what I like to collect. Also, I might say that many of the older science fiction
books are more valuable to collectors in general than many of those in other
fields of, say, comparable age and publisher. We asked Marks which part of his
collection he's most proud of. My pulp magazines, I think, is sort of my own
favorite among all the things. You know, people come into the house, visitors
that know nothing about science fiction, and I always trot them downstairs and
show them the collection. Kind of funny to watch somebody, you hand them one of
those old pulp magazines, give them one that isn't crumbling too badly, and then
they start looking at all the old ads from the 30s or whatever. It's kind of a
history lesson just to go through the things if they don't know the stories or
care about that especially, why they find the ads more fascinating than
anything. But I started out in the terms of serious collecting with the
magazines and the pulp especially, and those early ones especially are, there
just aren't very many copies around, and so that's kind of my favorite part of
the collection. Would he sell his collection for a high enough price? Probably
not now. I do know somebody who retired and took a round-the-world trip on
selling his. In the area John Marks concentrates on, paperbacks, pulps, and
magazines, he doubts there are many collections in the country except for
libraries that surpass his.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
A commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. Bob Wayne owns a specialty bookstore in
Fort Worth, Texas called Fantastic Worlds. He sells almost anything related to
science fiction or fantasy, including comics, gaming paraphernalia, and video
material. He is also a collector, principally of comics and hardback science
fiction books. We spoke with him recently about his hardback collection. Just
asking questions a curious non-collector might think of. What, for instance,
does he consider the ultimate for a hardback collector of science fiction? Well,
among the ultimate items to find in the hardcover field are some of the double
-day hardcover books of recent years that had very small printings and, for one
reason or another, had very small distribution. Two that come to mind are Roger
Zelazny's Nine Princes in Amber and Philip Jose Farmer's Flesh. And I would
be in the position of passing apocryphal, potentially, stories about why these
books are in slow editions or small editions. But my understanding is that both
of these books were remaindered very quickly upon publication and had very
little distribution outside of review copies and library copies. So those books
are both hard to find. I've only seen two copies of either of those books in the
time that I've been collecting books and looking at hardcovers. It's about 69.
We also asked him if he ever made any accidental finds, any nuggets that he
hadn't been expecting. I've had a number of strokes of what I would have to
consider luck as far as finding books that I consider to be quite valuable. I
was at a book fair at one time with Louis Shiner, a short story writer who's
appeared in Omni and Cheyall and various magazines. And we were just looking
through tons and tons of hardcover books, miles and miles of historical
romances. And we were giving up. And over in a little bitty pile on the side,
there was a little bitty book. A little bit was sticking out. It looked
familiar. And it was a Gnome Press book written by Henry Kuttner under the name
of Louis Paget called Robots Have No Tails that was in perfect condition. And
they had priced it at what I thought was the outrageous price of 40 cents. But I
went on ahead and paid the 40 cents. That was a tough blow to pay that much
money for a book worth just, you know, 100, 200 times more than that. But I was
able to tear loose the money. We wondered if there was any part of his
collection he's most proud of. I would have to say that there's not really any
one item that I'm most proud of as far as being difficult to find. And I do have
a one-of-a-kind item in my collection that I purchased at an auction this last
summer. It's a translation from the French of the book, Philip Jose Farmer
Conquers the Universe, that Philip Jose Farmer donated to an auction at a
convention that my store sponsored in Dallas during the summer. And that has a
cover letter and it's signed by Philip Jose Farmer and a copy of the book in
French that it was translated from. And it's a translation that the publisher
who has the option on this book, Berkley Books, has decided that they did not
want to publish in that form. So that will be the only version of that in
English. So I suppose as far as a rarity, having the only copy floating around
of that should be a novelty to some extent. Collecting in the science fiction
field is becoming a popular hobby among science fiction and fantasy fans. Fans
will collect anything, too. Books, magazines, comics, movie memorabilia,
artwork, and so on. If you're interested, Bob Wayne can help you out with advice
or material. Just contact the Fantastic Worlds Bookstore in Fort Worth, Texas.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Carson. Older readers and fans of science fiction
may be bewildered at what's happened to their field today. Science fiction is
not found only in books and movies anymore. It's spilled over into role-playing
games like Dungeons & Dragons and into numerous video games for home television
and computers. The market for materials related to these games is tremendous,
but so is the market for traditional science fiction books and magazines. Bob
Wayne, owner of Fantastic Worlds Bookstore in Fort Worth, Texas, supplies
customers in both areas. We asked him to tell us about Fantastic Worlds.
Fantastic Worlds Bookstore, the store that I own, started off, you know, two and
a half years ago. And we specialize in items of the fantastic. We have comic
books, science fiction books, fantasy role-playing games, video games, and
science fiction movies on videotape. And all the other paraphernalia that you
would expect in relation to those items. For example, lead miniatures for role
-playing games or dice. We have comics, bags to put comics in, boxes, posters,
portfolios, movie posters. Just an assortment of things, you know, related. We
go all the way from talking animals like Garfield to Superman to Doctor Who and
to Felix the Cat. Just a wide variety of things. All, the only common element is
that they're all science fiction, fantasy concepts to some extent.
Wayne also collects both comics and science fiction hardbacks. We asked him to
tell us how he began his collection. The way I got started in collecting is
actually the way I got started in reading. My paternal grandfather was a bus
driver. He used to pick up comic books that people left on the bus and bring
them, you know, and I would get them from him. So I learned how to read when I
was about five years old by reading comic books that were left on buses. So
everyone who rode on a bus through much of Texas in 1959, 1958, 1960, you know,
I'm in their debt for being able to read from an early age and for my love of
comics and science fiction. And I went from that to keeping the comics that I
had read and putting them on a little shelf in my closet. And from that point,
it began to snowball where, you know, I began picking up anything that I felt
was related to comics. And then I eventually got into science fiction reading
when I met Fritz Leiber at a convention in 1968. Wayne says his collection led
into his becoming the founder and proprietor of Fantastic Worlds. He tells us
how that happened. At one point, you know, I noticed that my personal taste in
comic books, the ones that I felt were the superior examples of comic books as
an art, and the ones that seemed to be increasing in value on the collector's
market, had a lot in common. And I began to feel that there was the potential
that if I picked up a couple of extra copies of the ones that I felt were really
good comics, that they would appreciate in value faster than just going in and
buying a handful at random. And so I began to speculate in comic books by buying
them on the hope that someone would come along later and want to pay me more
money for them than I had paid for them myself. And then I began to do the same
thing with science fiction books, but on the smaller margin. I began buying
books from England, which were not generally available in this country in the
late 70s, and taking them to conventions and selling those. And I kept sending
aside more and more extra comics and more and more books. And I realized that I
had to either buy myself a larger house to store all this stuff in than I was
only using a couple of times a year, or going ahead and open a store for
retailing. I chose to open a store, you know, because this has much more tax
advantages to owning a house just to store books in.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.